Okay, we're rolling to Venice, and let's start off with how did the, one more thing,
whenever you're talking, I shut my line down so that I don't get any interference on this
end, so maybe a few seconds after you start talking before I come back on.
Okay.
Okay, let's start out with how did that crystal movie project get started?
Well, I first began on Dark Crystal just over five years ago, and I took the idea of doing
a film like this to Lou Grade, who was the man responsible for putting the Muppet Show
in the air, and suggested that we do a film.
He loved the idea, and he said, but why don't we do a film first with the regular Muppet
Show characters?
So that became the Muppet movie, but he said, you know, Grade will do the Dark Crystal also.
So we started it way back then, and then I was working with Brian Fraud on this concept.
We continued to work for the next few years putting Dark Crystal together.
Okay.
How did that, could you go into a little bit of detail of how the story went about?
Well, let's see, the story of Dark Crystal came pretty much from all of the, it grew
out of conversations with my daughters, probably most of all.
Lisa and I were talking about the idea of doing a mythic fairy tale.
We had just done the characters for Saturday Night Live, and we found that was sort of
an interesting departure for us.
The characters were more realistic.
We used Taxi Dermas to eyes.
They looked more like real living creatures, and we thought, wouldn't it be interesting
to take this a little bit further so that we end up with something that actually looks
like a living breathing thing and set it in a whole fantasy world?
So that was kind of the challenge, was to create this entire world.
And about that time I brought Brian Fraud into it.
We operated for the first year on just the biggest development, knowing basically what
the story was going to be about, and what I wanted to design the characters first.
Then after we had the characters together, the storyline grew.
Actually, I was looking for a time to actually put this story down, to write it down.
I needed a couple of days clear, and I was about to fly over to England with my daughter,
Cheryl, who was about 60 or 17, I guess, at the time.
We got stranded at Kennedy Airport in a blizzard.
We were stuck at Howard Johnson's motor lodge for two days in the blizzard of 77.
During those two days, we had a wonderful time.
During that time, we put the basic working story together that did become the story
outline for The Dark Crystal.
Okay, that's sort of a part of the fun, sort of a family affair.
Yes, well, I tended to always work with my kids quite a bit, I think.
Okay, just to give a little bit of a background, what types of characters or creatures
inhabit the world with The Dark Crystal?
Well, they're very different from anything that we've ever done.
For that reason, we are not using the name Muppets in connection with this film,
or even puppetry, because it's something rather different from either Muppets or Puppets,
in that these are creatures.
Some of the creatures are small, I can't puppet, but some of them are great, big, large things.
With people inside, they weigh 75 pounds.
They're bigger, there are some things that are about 10 feet tall.
So we're into all kinds of different creatures.
They were all designed by Brian Fraud, who's the English fantasy illustrator.
Brian has done just a wonderful job of designing both creatures, their costumes, the entire world,
the landscape, the cathals, all of that was designed by Brian.
But it has a very different look, and it doesn't look anything like anything we've ever done before.
I'll take it Brian, storyboarded the idea down in.
He was doing design work, but actually we had other people doing storyboards for the whole film.
Okay.
Last week you talked a little bit about the design of the creatures.
Could you go into that just a little bit more, possibly how
they're manufactured or how they're put together?
Well, the normal process and the reason that it took a number of years to accomplish this,
was that Brian would do an original sketch.
Then we would go to have one of our sculptors then sculpt the figure.
Then we would mock it up so that we could manipulate it.
Then we would try moving this thing.
These things moved in different ways.
We would videotape a test.
Then we'd all sit around and look at the test and decide what should be done about it.
Then Brian would normally redesign the character.
The whole process would begin again.
We would go through sometimes like five generations of the character before we ended up with what we actually shot on film.
That's one of the reasons it was a long development time.
Could you go back to creating all new creatures yet making them realistic enough so that when somebody looked at it and make it accept them as being a creature?
Yes.
The whole problem was whether or not we could design a world that the audience would believe.
You would believe that this was a world with all of the depth.
In our own world there are so many things that you look around and you accept a very complicated world.
But all of these things have a sort of a depth to them.
There's a lot of stuff behind everything.
In that sense, Brian went about designing these creatures, the whole culture, the symbolism behind the different kinds of creatures and their lifestyles.
We would spend a lot of time sitting around talking about what these people ate and how they ate.
We would act towards each other and the kind of clothes that are evil creatures.
They are skinny bony creatures and we figured they are nearly a thousand years old.
They were layer upon layer upon layer of clothing and we figured they never took their clothes off.
They only added a new layer on top and it was all kind of really awful.
We figured it probably smelled terrible.
But it was all brocade and very rich fabrics.
It's that kind of thing.
You go through the thinking process of what this evolution was.
You do that not only for the creatures but for their environment and the places where they live.
We've talked with a lot of science fiction and fantasy authors about world building concepts.
They find that sometimes designing and building the world is the challenge of doing that.
That is more exciting than the actual story that comes about afterwards.
All of this for us kind of happened at the same time.
It was kind of a joint thing.
The story is very much an organic part of how these creatures are and the trouble they are in at the moment.
The story begins when this world is at a point of crisis.
Our story is very much part of the whole thing.
Yeah.
What I meant was when they're designing the world,
lots of times when they get to the story afterwards they have to work very hard in order to make the story as exciting as the world is designed.
I can see that as a potential hitfall.
We got into things where it would be lovely.
We spent a lot of time working on areas of the film that never got photographed even.
We worked a great deal on what the plant life was like.
We had many kinds of plants that were sort of halfway between plants and animals.
We had these trees that would walk around.
We had all areas of the mud that was alive.
Most of that stuff did not end up in the finished film.
When you are doing a story, the story has to take precedence.
Lots of that stuff is also serving a useful function to the story that you're telling.
It doesn't end up in the film.
From our standpoint, it was very valuable to have gone through this process to know what's there.
We know what's on the other side of that tree that you're not seeing.
Yeah, that would make it the realism as the scene came to life for you.
You'd better pass that on when you're filming this.
Otherwise, you end up with just a surface.
I think we have something here that has more depth to it because of the time we put into that.
Can we talk a little bit about the different types of churches, the Skeksus and the Gelflings?
Yeah, the Gelflings are sort of the closest thing to human beings.
There's a young male and female Gelfling, which are the leads, really.
The story revolves around them.
I was performing Jen, the male Gelfling.
Then we have the Mystics.
The Mystics are sort of big ancient old wizards.
There's nine of them.
They live in a area called Mystic Valley.
They've raised Jen from a baby.
Kira, the female Gelfling, was raised by the Pod People.
These are sort of like the peasants that live out in the woods.
The bad guys are the Skeksus.
There are nine of them also.
These are these ancient creatures that have been inhabiting the castle.
They are in control of the land because they also control the dark crystal,
which is this very large crystal that floats inside the castle.
Let's see what else.
The Skeksus have sort of a troop of soldiers, which are called Garthum.
Are we okay with that sound?
It's a bit. I can filter some of that out, I think, when we're reprocessed.
That's very strange. Is it on the line or is that in your recorder?
It must be on the line between here and New York.
Do you want me to call you back?
If you want to, I can call you back. It doesn't matter.
Okay, we'll call you back. What do they call you?
And you're, let's see, still 335-6647?
Let me go ahead and give you the studio number. It's 335-6648.
Okay, I'll call you right back.
All right.
Okay, remember that the recorder is going again here.
It's a different kind of noise over here.
Yeah, we're getting a good signal here.
We just got through talking about the various creatures.
You and Frank, I was co-director of the pictures.
Is that right? Yes, that's right.
How does one co-direct the picture?
Well, we were both performing in this film,
which is one of the reasons that co-directing made sense,
because when you're inside a set and you're actually performing,
it's rather difficult to
be the person outside that's running the film unit
and also seeing the scene with a sense of perspective.
So we found it very useful. Generally, if I was performing,
Frank was kind of running things, and vice versa.
And we worked very closely together
throughout the whole pre-production and post-production.
And Frank and I have worked together for many years, so it's not
an uncomfortable thing at all. We think very much alike.
And our image of the snow, I think, was
something that we shared the feelings of.
So it was quite an easy process.
Okay.
I read up and researched, and I moved us all, especially on PBS,
not long ago, on that you hosted on Puppetry.
And it went into how you all produced the show and everything.
But could you give a little bit of a sort of visual explanation
of what it's like on the set?
Well, let's see. Because we were operating most of these characters from below,
the sets were all built about four feet off the floor.
And we would be operating
with a...or sometimes through holes
on the floor, or sometimes the character would be there.
And there would be several people around
operating cables going to one particular character.
If you saw the credits on ET, so how many people
were credited with operating ET. And we had
dozens of characters that were all about that complicated.
So you could imagine we would have lots and lots of performers.
And we were always using a video system
up through the last television camera.
So we would be operating with television monitors.
If I was inside of a character operating,
I would be wearing a television monitor on my chest.
And all the other people who were helping to operate that same character
would also be watching television monitors.
So it was that kind of a
process.
That sort of high tech
industry. Yes, yes.
We were using a lot of different kinds of technical
and special effect.
Mechanisms, radio control, marionette rigs,
all of these things. But basically they're all
ways of assisting the performer create a
performance. So despite the fact that it's high tech,
I really think of it as
assisting a performance to happen.
Because that is what everything revolves around.
And the quality of the performance itself.
Yes, that's very good. Very good explanation.
Let's see. This was filmed during the England, right?
Yes, we were shooting in the Elstree Studios,
the same ones that have done Star Wars and Raiders of the Lost Art.
We did the great Muppet Caper there also.
Why was it shot over in England? Any particular reason?
Mostly because we were there doing the Muppet show
also in Elstree. This film studio
was about two blocks from where we were working. And I wanted to go straight
from the end of the Muppet show into the great Muppet Caper.
So while we were still doing that television show, we were doing the pre-production
for the movie. If I
decided to do that in the United States, we probably would have had to
do it about eight months later.
You're talking
a little while about some of the scenes and how you had to work from a hole
underneath the set and stuff like that. Did you have, I enjoyed reading a description
of how you manipulated Kermit when you were doing
the Muppet movie, the first scene in the swamp?
Did you have any scenes that were as difficult as
Manning, what was it, the USS Henson submarine that you were in?
Well let's see, I don't think, we never had anything, it was quite that
claustrophobic.
I mean fortunately I'm not a claustrophobic person, so I don't
mind being sprinted into a small space.
But in the Muppet movie, in the great Muppet Caper,
we would very often find ourselves in a situation where we were
out in the real world, like riding in a
taxi cab, where there might be three or four of us sort of jammed underneath
where the seat would have been in a regular automobile.
But since this film was all in a fantasy
world, which was designed for us to operate in, we
virtually never had that same kind of discomfort.
So all of our sets were designed with knowing that we wanted
to be able to get underneath the ground, or through
a rock wall, and so all of it was designed
with trap doors or areas that could be
removed.
Yeah, okay.
The basic premise behind the story is
I guess what the eternal concept between good and evil?
Well it's that sort of thing, it's
the basic story really relates to
a young man growing up
facing the world, facing the evil
powers and the unknown, and conquering fear.
So in that sense it's a very standard thing,
standard fairy tale myth,
basic story. But then on top of that I think
the actual story that we're telling is
interesting and has sort of its own
strange variations of this world.
Yeah, I'm reading Brian's book.
I think people are really going to be able to get into the characters
because of how well they're all developed.
I hope so, yeah, but that is certainly our
desire, our intent.
Okay, one last question here on Dark Crystal.
Because of all the work you did on developing the characters in the world, anything like that,
do you think there might be
another Dark Crystal movie somewhere in the future?
Well the story itself is complete in itself
and so it doesn't lend itself to Dark Crystal 2.
I don't think there will be a sequel as such.
We could have another story in this same world.
But I think we're kind of waiting until after this film opens to see how we feel about that.
Yeah, they really
they've had several fantasy movies after the summer that
none of them really seem to capture the genre.
In fact I guess one of the last and best was The Wizard of Oz and that was quite a lot of it.
So in that sense I really hope you're successful with that because
I really enjoyed the fantasy stories.
Yes, to us it was a wonderful challenge. It was something we had a great time doing.
And whether or not we
are or we will be successful at it is something I have no
idea yet. We won't really know until this whole moment.
Yeah, sort of a calculated gamble in that sense.
Yeah.
You still have time?
Well, I'm late but okay.
I wanted to get a little bit of background information on how you got started
and the various programs that you worked on and stuff like that.
We can make this brief if you'd like.
The first question of course is how did you get started in all this?
Well, I started just out of high school
on local television in Washington DC.
I started doing a little puppet show there that was on
late at night. It was an 11, 25 in the evening, 5 minute show.
And I had that show while I was going to college
for the next few years.
And during that time the style of the puppet sort of came together.
Then I moved up to New York and started doing guest shots on
variety shows.
The Jimmy Dean show, which is a country western show with our dog Rolf,
we did that for three years. We did the Ed Sullivan show for a while.
And about that time Sesame Street came along.
Sesame Street, we're in the process of working
on our 14th season right now. So that's something
that is still a part of our operation here.
The Muppet Show came along
about like seven years ago I guess.
We did the Muppet Show. We did five years of that, which was
120 shows. And there's first and all of this
for the recent Century Television Special. A lot of guest shots.
That sort of brings us up
to date I guess.
I suppose
I guess it's kind of funny, but wasn't
Robert Beckey really put you on the map?
Which one? Remember the song, Robert Beckey?
Isn't that sort of it really put you on the map and grabbed a public attention?
I never would have thought of that.
It may have. Robert Beckey
came up in the first season of
Sesame Street. And I think it
made it close to the top ten. Not quite all.
I don't think it got up to about number ten.
I don't think it got any higher than that nationally.
I think probably Sesame Street itself was
something that the general audience
became aware of before that.
But I think we were mostly known in the industry I guess.
I can remember watching Sesame Street when it came out and really enjoying
your work because the humor that you put into it
seemed to be written on two levels. The both would laugh at one thing
and the kids would laugh at another.
That was a fairly conscious decision
that we've always known that
the television set is controlled by
not only the little kids but also their parents and their older brothers and sisters.
That sort of thing.
Could you give a brief reason
as to why you designed the Muppets rather than working with traditional puppets
or marionettes?
Well, let's see. I don't know.
When I started,
let's see. I started with no connection with any normal
puppeteers or anything.
So I guess not having a background in it
nor knowing hardly anything about it, I started in
probably a fresh direction
coming mostly from just a different place I suppose.
You suppose it might have been that you're working
in the medium of television that caused you to use the design where you could
have more, I guess, facial expression on your characters
rather than as a static expression on marionettes or not? Yeah, oh certainly.
Certainly. The fact that we, all of our original characters were designed just for television.
We were probably one of the first people
to do that because even
Bert Tilstrom, whose work I had seen
and probably he was likely the major influence on me, I suppose.
But even his work had started before television.
And so it wasn't particularly designed
for the medium.
Okay.
When did you meet Frank Oz
and form that sort of collaborative effort with him?
Frank joined us about in 1960.
Oh, maybe 1964 or
five just before we started doing the Jimmy Dean show.
He was a kid at the time.
So he was with me
in a lot of the early days of our development.
And then as well, he started doing voices.
A lot of his voice things really came into
really great shape about the time we started on Sesame Street.
Yeah, I think Frank's name
was just highly appropriate for what he does.
Speaking of voices,
I know this, but this is just for the audience.
Who has which voices that are really popular characters?
Well, it's the Frank Oz, Fawzi Bear and Fawzi
who was sort of named for Frank Oz.
But Frank does Fawzi and Figgie, Animal, Sam Eagle,
on the Muppet Show,
on Sesame Street he does Cookie Monster, Grover,
Bert, and in Dark Crystal
he's doing a character named Ogre
and he does the Chamberlain.
So those are two of the major characters in the Dark Crystal.
Say, what else?
I do a character named Jen in the Dark Crystal
and I was also performing one of the Skeksis, the Ritual Master.
More or less an incidental character.
On the Muppet Show I do Kermit,
Rolf, Waldorf, the Chef,
a few others like Dr. T.
On Sesame Street the only characters I'm doing there
are Ernie, Kermit the Frog,
who occasionally works on Sesame Street still.
You and Frank are about money, right?
Yes, we're trying. Okay.
How do you know the Muppet world?
Yes, we've been doing that for a long time and it's still fun. We still have a good time doing that stuff.
It comes to this, I can remember, I don't even remember
where I saw this, but I thought it was on the Muppet Show because it was on, excuse me,
the Sesame Street. It was a segment where the
Swedish Chef was making a sandwich and the subtitles
were all in Chinese.
Well, that was the first time we used the Swedish Chef and that was something
I'm quite sure this was
on a pilot special we did for ABC
many years ago. It was called Muppet Show.
Okay, that was, I remember laughing so hard that I cried
when I saw that. That was so hilarious.
I've got to look at that too. I haven't seen that show in a long time.
Okay, well, I think I've covered
I have a guess here. If I was going to make a guess, I would guess that you
were a computer games fan. Would I be guessing right?
It's interesting, not particularly.
I grew up playing a lot of games
and I enjoy computer games, but I
sort of never get around to doing it. I guess I have a busy life and I
don't, you know, we had an Atari,
we have an Atari unit at home for the kids, which I've enjoyed playing some of
those games, but I haven't really gotten into it.
Okay, missed my mark,
what can I say? If a person was interested
in doing what you do or going
to work for somebody like you, what type of area would they study in,
work in, do, what type of person are you looking for?
Well, I don't know. It's different kinds of things. There's a performer
for performers, I look for people who have
a sense of humor,
a sense of humor and a kind of
ability of performing and focusing their performance in their
hands. There's specific things one looks for in terms of
puppeteering.
But, you know, the whole film business
right now is a very exciting time.
Everybody is on the lookout for people with a lot of talent.
Okay, well I'll take that
plenty of your time there. Certainly do appreciate you taking time not to talk with me.
Okay, good Dave. It was a pleasure. Okay, whenever we get the tapes cut together
I'll send you a copy of the completed shows. Great, that would be very nice.
Okay, thank you. Thank you very much Mr. Hansen. Bye-bye.